---
layout: post
title: TedX talk on project-based learning
date: 2020-02-24 12:54 +0100
learned:
  - Public speaking
  - Project-based learning
  - Writing a speech
---

Here's a link to my TedX talk on Youtube:

  <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=i1_AlvWJiH4>

Following is the transcript.

## Going to Mathsland

For the past few years, I’ve been trying to learn French. I’ve used a range of
apps, studied the dictionary, learned the grammar, the lot. And still, I can’t
speak French. Why is it that when I went to France for a week, I felt my
confidence in the language skyrocket? 

Well, immersion in the language is probably why. Because I was surrounded by
French, I learned French better.  

What if this were possible with maths? Or Chemistry? 

I’d like to welcome you to the land of maths, let’s call it “Mathsland”. You
visit this magical place not to taste the excellent pi’s but to better
understand mathematics. You learn just like how a native French speaker knows
French—you become fluent in maths. 

This might sound too good to be true, but with a teaching method called
project-based learning, we can get close to sending students off to Mathsland. 

In project-based learning, instead of being spoon-fed information, groups of
students are given a massive, real-world task, which they work on for an
extended period of time. Through working on that task, they understand how to
use different resources and tools related to the subject being taught. Project
based learning drives students to encounter the core ideas and principles of a
subject. 

About 4 years ago, I was part of a pilot where our school tried out
project-based learning. My group’s task was to design a school from scratch.
This might seem excessive for a team of 12-year old’s, but it was quite possibly
the most fun I have had learning. Budgeting, planning, project management,
teamwork, presentations. All these real-world problems we had to constantly work
through in time for a deadline. We also had to work almost entirely by
ourselves—we had a teacher mentoring but they only guided us and didn’t hold our
hand the whole way through. 

One of the things I loved about it is that I knew why I was learning things. I
didn’t just have to memorize the properties of different timbers for a GCSE
exam, I had to learn it so that I would know which one to use for the floors of
the classrooms. I didn’t have to learn how to use Excel because my IT teacher
told me to, I had to learn it so I could keep track of the imaginary school’s
budget. 

Also, in this project, we had little to no help from our teachers, we were
completely independent. We had to direct ourselves and plan our time well to
make sure we hit our deadline. Giving this independence made us want to go above
and beyond, to show our true potential, and gave us experience in real-world
time management. 

Another advantage is the teamwork aspect of the project. I was in a group with
people I didn’t really know, this gave me experience in collaborating with
people outside my comfort circle, a skill which is sought after in today’s
globalized environment.  

I’m going to go on a bit of a philosophical tangent to explain why project-based
learning is possibly better than the status quo: Right now, the standard
teaching technique emphasizes repetition and reinforcement—basically, practice
and tests. However, many philosophers and educational pioneers are arguing that
students best learn when they build knowledge for themselves, they use their
experiences with the world to create new knowledge. This idea is called
constructivism and it has been proven to be a much more effective way of
learning new things. Rather than just being told how the world works, you find
out for yourself. 

The main idea in project-based learning (and other alternative teaching
strategies) is to stop focusing on what is being taught and instead to focus on
what is being learned. Project-based learning has been proven to be more
effective, more engaging, and more fun for the students as well as the teachers
than conventional teaching methods. 

But let’s think practically for a moment, will anyone use this technique? After
all, if you don’t do well in your exams then finding a job to show off the
skills you’ve learned through project-based learning might be difficult. It
seems like not focusing on revising for the exam means your result will be
worse, right? 

Wrong. Some studies have shown that students who learn through project-based
learning achieve significantly better results than those who learn through a
conventional method. For both technical and non-technical subjects. Also, the
same studies show that students are more engaged in lessons and have a better
attitude towards learning. 

Let’s face it—schools will probably not adopt this strategy; schooling has
barely improved for 100 years and I don’t see signs of that changing. So, what
can you do? Well, as a teacher, try to use project-based learning in your
lessons, there are plenty premade lesson plans online you can use. As a student,
try to use project-based learning for yourself, set yourself that extra
challenge and you’ll see how much more you’ll achieve. And as an adult, try to
use project-based learning in your own life, learn something new the right way. 

Everyone deserves a chance to visit Mathsland. 
